# Thespeon Tools
Aside from Thespeons main generative capabilities, the package also offers a number of tools to help you handle both the input and output of Thespeon in an intuitive way. In this markdown we will list the tools you have at your disposal besides ThespeonEngine itself and their intended use.  

---

## Table of Contents

- [Thespeon Tools](#thespeon-tools)
	- [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
	- [1. Inputs Namespace](#1-inputs-namespace)
		- [1.1. **ThespeonCharacterAsset**](#11-thespeoncharacterasset)
		- [1.2. **ControlCharacters Enum**](#12-controlcharacters-enum)
		- [1.3. **ThespeonCharacterHelper**](#13-thespeoncharacterhelper)
	- [2. Utils Namespace](#2-utils-namespace)
	- [2.1. **WavExporter**](#21-wavexporter)

---

## 1. [Inputs Namespace](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md)

At the core of the [`Lingotion.Thespeon.Inputs`](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md) namespace lies the `ThespeonInput` and `ThespeonInputSegment` classes we are familiar with from earlier [guides](./get-started-unity.md), but it also offers the following tools to help you create input instances in your code.

### 1.1. **[ThespeonCharacterAsset](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md#class-thespeoncharacterasset)**

The [`ThespeonCharacterAsset`](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md#class-thespeoncharacterasset) is a ScriptableObject containing an `actorName` and a `ModuleType` and represents a selection of a specific actor and module type to run. The Lingotion Thespeon package will dynamically generate a number of these for you to reflect the actor packs you have imported. You will find an up to date set of these under your `Assets` > `Lingotion` > `CharacterAssets` folder. Each of these holds a valid combination of an `actorName` and a `ModuleType`, see the [SimpleCharacter](../Samples~/Simple%20Character/SimpleCharacter.cs) sample for an example of how to use a `ThespeonCharacterAsset` in your project. You may also create your own assets under `Assets/Create/Lingotion/Character` but with loss of validation.

---

### 1.2. **[ControlCharacters Enum](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md/#enum-controlcharacters)**
Thespeon utilizes some special characters for special purposes. These characters are not normally found on a keyboard and as such we have collected the supported characters in the public enum [`ControlCharacters`](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md/#enum-controlcharacters) for easier access. 
Note! Due to enums being internally stored as `int` values these need to be casted to `char` types to be used after which they can easily be formatted into your strings as in this example:

```csharp
char pauseChar = (char)ControlCharacters.Pause;
string myLine = $"Lets pause for a while {pauseChar} to catch my breath.";
``` 
Below is a list of the currently available options with more on the way in future updates:
- `ControlCharacters.Pause` - The pause character will insert a short pause in the spoken dialogue. Several of these can be chained to achieve a longer pause. 

--- 
### 1.3. **[ThespeonCharacterHelper](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md#class-thespeoncharacterhelper)**
In some situations handling a number of `ThespeonCharacterAssets` is not suitable - such as when actors are selected during play mode and not in edit mode. To cover these cases the [`ThespeonCharacterHelper`](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Inputs.md#class-thespeoncharacterhelper) class provides a couple of `static` methods to help you select the actor you want. 

The first of the methods below returns a list of two-element tuples - one for each currently valid actor-module type combination. If you already know which actor you intend to use then the second will return a list of all ModuleTypes available for that actor.

```csharp
List<(string characterName, ModuleType moduleType)> GetAllCharactersAndModules()
public static List<ModuleType> GetAllModulesForCharacter(string characterName)
```

---
## 2. [Utils Namespace](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Utils.md)
The purpose of the [`Lingotion.Thespeon.Utils`](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Utils.md) namespace it to provide general utilities that help you make Thespeon fit into your project in the way you want. Below you will find a description of the the set of tools currently available.

## 2.1. **[WavExporter](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Utils.md#class-wavexporter)**
In all of the package samples the audio generated by Thespeon is directly streamed to an active `AudioClip` but there are circumstances where real-time consumption is not preferred. In Edit Mode, you can access the Audio Test Lab via the Thespeon Info Window, typically found under Window > Lingotion > Thespeon Info in the Unity Editor, where you can generate and save .wav files for later use. However, if your dialogue script is runtime dependent then you might want to generate audio whenever you have the time and resources to do so, and stow the results away for later use. The [WavExporter](./api/Public%20API/Lingotion_Thespeon_Utils.md#class-wavexporter) lets you do that and save your generated audio to a wav file for later loading.
